docs/Overview.md, before:

# AMWA BCP-007-01: NMOS With NDI
{:.no_toc}

- A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents header" from above
{:toc}

_(c) AMWA 2023, CC Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-ND 4.0)_

## Introduction

NDI (Network Display Interface) is an IP transport and control technology created by Newtek. NDI® is a registered trademark of Vizrt NDI AB. It includes definitions of encoding, transport and provides a full SDK to implement IP media transport. This document outlines how NDI devices can be managed through NMOS IS-04 and IS-05.

Familiarity with the [JT-NM Reference Architecture](https://jt-nm.org/reference-architecture/) and the [NDI® SDK](https://ndi.video/sdk/) are assumed.

See also the [NMOS Technical Overview](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos/main/docs/Technical_Overview.html).

## Use of Normative Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

## Dependencies

This document was written based upon [NDI® Advanced SDK Version 5.5](https://ndi.video/sdk/), however devices which implement other versions of the SDK MAY also be supported.

This document depends upon the following reference documents:

- [NMOS IS-04 - Discovery and Registration](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/)
- [NMOS IS-05 - Device Connection Management](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-05/)
- [NMOS BCP-004-01 - Receiver Capabilities](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-004-01/)
- [NMOS BCP-006-02 - NMOS with H.264](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-006-02/)
- [NMOS BCP-006-03 - NMOS with H.265](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-006-03/)

## Definitions

The NMOS terms ‘Controller’, ‘Node’, ‘Source’, ‘Flow’, ‘Sender’, ‘Receiver’ are used as defined in the [NMOS Glossary](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos/main/docs/Glossary.html).

This specification also defines the following terms:

### NDI SDK

The NDI Software Development Kit (SDK) is offered in two variants. The base version is referred to here as **NDI Standard SDK**, The Advanced SDK is be referred to here as **NDI Advanced SDK**. References to **NDI SDK** apply to both **NDI Standard SDK** and **NDI Advanced SDK**.

### Native NDI Device

A “device” as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Device” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Device and a Native NDI Device.

### Non-NMOS NDI Device

A Native NDI Device which does not support the NMOS specifications.

### NDI Stream

A "stream" as defined in the NDI SDK. An NDI Stream is a multiplexed structure that could include one or more video, audio and metadata flows.

### Native NDI Sender

A "sender" of an NDI stream as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Sender” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Sender and a Native NDI Sender.

### Native NDI Receiver

A "receiver" of an NDI stream as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Receiver” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Receiver and a Native NDI Receiver.

### NDI Device

A Native NDI Device which implements IS-04 and allows registration in an NMOS Registry and implements IS-05 for connection management.

### NDI Sender

An NMOS Sender which implements the NDI transport.

### NDI Receiver

An NMOS Receiver which implements the NDI transport.

### NDI High Bandwidth

An NDI stream which utilizes proprietary codecs for audio and video. NDI High Bandwidth is supported by both the NDI Standard SDK and NDI Advanced SDK.

### NDI HX, NDI HX2, NDI HX3

NDI High Efficiency profiles, named **NDI HX**, **NDI HX2**, and **NDI HX3**, utilize H.264/AVC, H.265/HEVC, AAC and Opus codecs. These are supported by the NDI Advanced SDK only.

**NDI HX** utilizes Long-GOP H.264 video encoding at maximum Full HD resolution and AAC audio encoding. NDI HX is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX** in some documentation.

**NDI HX2** utilizes H.264 or H.265 Long-GOP video coding up to UHD resolution and AAC or Opus audio encoding. NDI HX2 is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX2** in some documentation.

**NDI HX3** utilizes H.264 or H.265 Short-GOP video coding up to UHD resolution and AAC or Opus audio encoding. NDI HX3 is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX3** in some documentation.

### NDI

This document uses the term "NDI" when referring to all NDI variants, and specify "NDI High Bandwidth", "NDI HX", "NDI HX2", or "NDI HX3" where the text applies to specific NDI variants.

## Native NDI Model

NDI Streams utilize a variety of codecs to compress media. In many cases, the NDI SDK negotiates between Native NDI Devices to select the transport and encoding parameters used for an NDI Stream. A Native NDI Receiver does not learn about the encoding and transport parameters of an NDI Stream until a connection is established.

The NDI SDK, by default, automatically selects and negotiates encoding parameters between Native NDI Devices. Media content enters the Native NDI Sender as raw, uncompressed media and raw, uncompressed media emerges from Native NDI Receivers.

The NDI Advanced SDK supports compressed NDI Streams utilizing H.264, H.265, AAC and Opus codecs. Media content enters the Native NDI Sender as compressed media and compressed media emerges from Native NDI Receivers.

### NDI Metadata

Metadata connections can be implicitly established by the NDI SDK when video connections are established. In some cases, bi-directional metadata connections can be established by the NDI SDK between the Native NDI Sender and Native NDI Receiver. In such cases, NDI Metadata MAY NOT be represented explicitly in NMOS.

## NMOS-NDI Model

Native NDI Devices, Native NDI Receivers and Native NDI Senders are represented by NMOS Devices/Nodes, Receivers and Senders respectively.

A controller which supports NDI connection management via IS-05 MUST support connection of NDI Receivers to NDI Senders. This controller MAY also support connection of NDI Receivers to Native NDI senders, however the discovery of such senders is outside the scope of this document.

### Non-NMOS Connections to NDI Devices

NDI Receivers MUST NOT preclude connections established with Native NDI Senders via the NDI SDK. If an NDI Stream is connected to an NDI Receiver outside of IS-05, the transport parameters of the Connection API of the Receiver MUST be updated to reflect the running parameters which have been set via the alternate protocol. The Receiver MUST update its IS-04 resource `subscription.active` property accordingly, set `subscription.sender_id` to `null` and increment it's version number. If the resource has been registered with an NMOS registry the entry MUST be updated to match the Node API.

### Multiplexed Flow Model

Receivers of NDI Streams MUST have the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and Senders of NDI Streams MUST be associated with a Flow having the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`, as NDI connections could contain multiple essences including video, audio and metadata.

A Flow of `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` format MUST have parents video or audio sub-Flows. The current NDI SDK limits to a maximum of one of each video, audio and metadata sub-Flow, but this specification supports future SDK versions which MAY support multiple audio, video or metadata sub-Flows.

![MUX Sender Model](images/NMOS-NDI-Mux-sender-drawio.svg)

## NDI IS-04 Resources

### Flows

#### MUX Flow

An NDI Sender MUST be associated with a mux Flow having the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and the `media_type` attribute set to `application/ndi`.

The mux Flow MUST have parent video and/or audio sub-Flows identifying the sub-Flows multiplexed in the NDI Stream. The mux Flow MUST be associated with a Source of format `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`.

#### Video sub-Flows

For NDI High Bandwidth the video sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `video/raw`.

For NDI HX, HX2 and HX3 the video sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `video/H264` or `video/H265`.

NDI Senders SHOULD map the employed `NDIlib_FourCC_video_type` to the NMOS `bit-depth`, `component` and `sub-sampling` properties.

NDI video+alpha video flows MUST be modeled as a single video sub-Flow, including a channel labelled `A` in the `components` parameters for the alpha channel.

#### Audio sub-Flows

For NDI High Bandwidth the audio sub-Flows `media_type` SHOULD be a supported PCM type such as `audio/L16`, `audio/L20`, or `audio/L24`.

For NDI HX, HX2 and HX3 the audio sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `audio/mpeg4-generic` or `audio/opus`.

### Sources

The Source associated with a mux Flow MUST have its `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and its `parents` attribute MUST enumerate the Sources associated with the sub-Flows.

### Senders

NDI Senders do not utilize SDP to describe the NDI Stream; therefore NDI Senders MUST have their `manifest_href` attribute set to `null`.

NDI Senders MUST have their `transport` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi`.

NDI Senders MUST be associated with a mux Flow.

#### NDI Group Tags

NDI Senders MUST specify the NDI groups, through use of tags. NDI group tag MUST use the URN `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi:group`. The NDI group tag can have multiple values to represent multiple NDI groups, for example:
```json
"tags": {
   "urn:x-nmos:tag:transport:ndi:group": [
      "Cameras",
      "Studio-A"
   ]
}
```

### Receivers

The NDI Receiver MUST have its `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`.

#### Receiver Capabilities

An NDI Receiver MUST specify as a minimum the following capabilities:

```json
"caps" : {
    "media_types" : [
       "application/ndi"
    ]
}
```

Additional capabilities MAY be expressed in the `constraint_sets` array attribute of the Receiver for the stream of media type `application/ndi` and for the associated sub-streams.

## NDI IS-05 Resources

### Transport Type

The IS-05 transport for NDI is `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi`.

### Sender transport_file

Not used.

### Sender Transport Parameters

The IS-05 schemas `sender_transport_params_ndi.json` and `constraints_schema_sender_ndi.json` describe the transport parameters associated with the NDI transport.

```json
[
  {
    "machine_name": "ndi-machine-name",
    "source_name": "ndi-sender-unique-name",
    "source_url" : "...",
    "source_address" : "10.10.10.123:5906"
  }
]
```
#### machine_name
The name of the sender node in the NDI domain. A node MUST report the machine name being utilized by the NDI SDK. A controller SHOULD NOT specify a new `machine_name` but SHOULD use `auto` or the current `machine_name`. 

#### source_name
The name of the NDI stream created by the Native NDI Sender in the NDI domain. This parameter MUST NOT be concatenated with `machine_name` in the format `machine_name(source_name)`.

> Informative note: In the NDI domain, the `source_name` and `machine_name` are concatenated in the format `machine_name(source_name)` when streams are discovered and connected, however in the `transport_params`, these properties are kept independent.

#### source_url 
The URL of the sender as utilized by the NDI SDK. Sender SHOULD report this upon activation. The contents are proprietary to the NDI SDK and SHOULD NOT be interpreted. A controller SHOULD specify `auto` or the current value when setting this property. 

#### source_address
The IP address and port that the sender is utilizing for the stream. It MUST be in the format `ip_address:port_number`.

### Receiver Parameters

The IS-05 schemas `receiver_transport_params_ndi.json` and `constraints_schema_receiver_ndi.json` describe the transport parameters associated with the NDI transport.

```json
[
  {
    "machine_name": "ndi-machine-name",
    "source_name": "ndi-sender-unique-name",
    "source_url" : "...",
    "source_address" : "10.10.10.123:5906"
  }
]
```

machine name / source name SHOULD always be specified. Others MAY be specified.

#### machine_name
This indicates the device name of the Native NDI Sender that is to be connected, as utilized by the NDI SDK.

#### source_name
The name of the Native NDI Sender stream in the NDI domain that is to be connected. This property MUST NOT be concatenatedwith `machine_name` in the format `machine_name(source_name)`.

> Informative notes: In the NDI domain, the `source_name` and `machine_name` are concatenated in the format `machine_name(source_name)` when streams are discovered and connected, however in the `transport_params`, these properties are kept independent. 

#### source_url 
The URL of the sender as utilized by the NDI SDK. The contents are proprietary to the NDI SDK and SHOULD NOT be interpreted. A controller SHOULD specify this parameter with values provided by a sender's `transport_params` or the NDI SDK discovery methods. If this parameter is set to `null`, the receiver MUST determine for itself the value of `source_url`.

#### source_address
The IP address and port that the sender is utilizing for the stream. If specified, it MUST be in the format `ip_address:port_number`, other wise it MUST be set to `null` if not known.

## IS-05 Connection Bahavior 
 Connections in the NDI domain can be specified in several different ways. In each case the Native NDI Receiver identifies the stream to be connected through at least one of:
 - `machine_name` and `source_name`
 - `source_url`
 - `source_address` and `source_name`
 - `source_address`

 Native NDI Devices will not necessarily support all these methods, so Controllers and Devices SHOULD specify as much information as is known in `transport_params`. If the NDI Receiver is not provided with one or more of the above parameters, but is able to determine the additional parameters, it MAY report these updated `transport_params` upon activation.
 
## Controllers

A controller MUST be able to discover NDI Senders and NDI Receivers by using the query API.

A controller MUST be able to connect an NDI Receiver to an NDI Sender by using the IS-05 API. See example [Use Case 1](#use-case-1-ndi-sender-to-ndi-receiver---is-05-connection).

A controller MAY be able to discover Native NDI Senders.

A controller MAY be able to connect an NDI Receiver to a Native NDI Sender by using the IS-05 API. See example [Use Case 2](#use-case-2-native-ndi-sender-to-ndi-receiver---is-05-connection).

## Use Case Scenarios (Informative)

Use cases are informative only and provided as examples.

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-Ecosystem-drawio.svg)

### Use Case 1: NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - IS-05 Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase1-drawio.svg)

- Controller is informed of sender (device C) through IS-04.
- Controller is informed of receiver (device D) through IS-04.
- Controller initiates connection to receiver (device D) from sender (device C) via IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device D) reports its connections status and transport parameters as outlined in IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 2: Native NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - IS-05 Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase2-drawio.svg)

- Controller is informed of sender (device W) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Controller is informed of receiver (device A) through IS-04.
- Controller initiates connection to receiver (device A) from sender (device W) via IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device A) reports its connections status and transport parameters as outlined in IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 3: Native NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase3-drawio.svg)

- NDI Receiver (device B) is informed of Native NDI Sender (device X) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- NDI Receiver (device B) initiates connection to Native NDI Sender (device X) directly via NDI SDK.
- NDI Receiver updates its IS-04 `active` state, sets the `sender_id` to `null`, increments the version number.
- The controller does not initiate the connection, but can monitor the connection status via IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 4: NDI Sender to Native NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase4-drawio.svg)

- In this scenario, it is assumed the NDI Sender is active.
- Native NDI Receiver (device X) is informed of NDI Sender (device B) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Native NDI Receiver (device X) initiates connection to NDI Sender (device B) directly via NDI SDK.
- The controller does not initiate the connection and cannot monitor the state of the connection.

### Use Case 5: Native NDI Sender to Native NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase5-drawio.svg)

- This scenario exists outside the realm of NMOS. The controller might not be aware of these devices, and does not initiate any connection between them.
- Native NDI Receiver (device Z) and Native NDI Sender (device Y) discover through their own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Connection from Native NDI Sender (device Y) to Native NDI Receiver (device Z) is performed by the NDI SDK.

### Use Case 6: NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase6-drawio.svg)

- In this scenario, it is assumed the NDI Sender is active.
- In this scenario, both sender (device E) and receiver (device F) are NMOS devices, but connection is established outside of IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device E) and NDI Sender (device F) discover through their own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Connection from NDI Sender (device E) to NDI Receiver (device F) is performed by the NDI SDK.
- NDI Receiver updates its IS-04 `active` state, sets the `sender_id` to `null`, increments the version number.
- The controller does not initiate the connection, but can monitor the connection status via IS-04 and IS-05.

Commit message:

Revised text around transport_params and connection behaviour.

docs/Overview.md, after:

# AMWA BCP-007-01: NMOS With NDI
{:.no_toc}

- A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents header" from above
{:toc}

_(c) AMWA 2023, CC Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-ND 4.0)_

## Introduction

NDI (Network Display Interface) is an IP transport and control technology created by Newtek. NDI® is a registered trademark of Vizrt NDI AB. It includes definitions of encoding, transport and provides a full SDK to implement IP media transport. This document outlines how NDI devices can be managed through NMOS IS-04 and IS-05.

Familiarity with the [JT-NM Reference Architecture](https://jt-nm.org/reference-architecture/) and the [NDI® SDK](https://ndi.video/sdk/) are assumed.

See also the [NMOS Technical Overview](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos/main/docs/Technical_Overview.html).

## Use of Normative Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

## Dependencies

This document was written based upon [NDI® Advanced SDK Version 5.5](https://ndi.video/sdk/), however devices which implement other versions of the SDK MAY also be supported.

This document depends upon the following reference documents:

- [NMOS IS-04 - Discovery and Registration](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/)
- [NMOS IS-05 - Device Connection Management](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-05/)
- [NMOS BCP-004-01 - Receiver Capabilities](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-004-01/)
- [NMOS BCP-006-02 - NMOS with H.264](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-006-02/)
- [NMOS BCP-006-03 - NMOS with H.265](https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-006-03/)

## Definitions

The NMOS terms ‘Controller’, ‘Node’, ‘Source’, ‘Flow’, ‘Sender’, ‘Receiver’ are used as defined in the [NMOS Glossary](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos/main/docs/Glossary.html).

This specification also defines the following terms:

### NDI SDK

The NDI Software Development Kit (SDK) is offered in two variants. The base version is referred to here as **NDI Standard SDK**, The Advanced SDK is be referred to here as **NDI Advanced SDK**. References to **NDI SDK** apply to both **NDI Standard SDK** and **NDI Advanced SDK**.

### Native NDI Device

A “device” as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Device” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Device and a Native NDI Device.

### Non-NMOS NDI Device

A Native NDI Device which does not support the NMOS specifications.

### NDI Stream

A "stream" as defined in the NDI SDK. An NDI Stream is a multiplexed structure that could include one or more video, audio and metadata flows.

### Native NDI Sender

A "sender" of an NDI stream as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Sender” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Sender and a Native NDI Sender.

### Native NDI Receiver

A "receiver" of an NDI stream as defined in the NDI SDK. This is not the same as a “Receiver” as defined in the NMOS Glossary. Note that the same physical or logical apparatus MAY simultaneously act as an NMOS Receiver and a Native NDI Receiver.

### NDI Device

A Native NDI Device which implements IS-04 and allows registration in an NMOS Registry and implements IS-05 for connection management.

### NDI Sender

An NMOS Sender which implements the NDI transport.

### NDI Receiver

An NMOS Receiver which implements the NDI transport.

### NDI High Bandwidth

An NDI stream which utilizes proprietary codecs for audio and video. NDI High Bandwidth is supported by both the NDI Standard SDK and NDI Advanced SDK.

### NDI HX, NDI HX2, NDI HX3

NDI High Efficiency profiles, named **NDI HX**, **NDI HX2**, and **NDI HX3**, utilize H.264/AVC, H.265/HEVC, AAC and Opus codecs. These are supported by the NDI Advanced SDK only.

**NDI HX** utilizes Long-GOP H.264 video encoding at maximum Full HD resolution and AAC audio encoding. NDI HX is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX** in some documentation.

**NDI HX2** utilizes H.264 or H.265 Long-GOP video coding up to UHD resolution and AAC or Opus audio encoding. NDI HX2 is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX2** in some documentation.

**NDI HX3** utilizes H.264 or H.265 Short-GOP video coding up to UHD resolution and AAC or Opus audio encoding. NDI HX3 is sometimes stylized **NDI\|HX3** in some documentation.

### NDI

This document uses the term "NDI" when referring to all NDI variants, and specify "NDI High Bandwidth", "NDI HX", "NDI HX2", or "NDI HX3" where the text applies to specific NDI variants.

## Native NDI Model

NDI Streams utilize a variety of codecs to compress media. In many cases, the NDI SDK negotiates between Native NDI Devices to select the transport and encoding parameters used for an NDI Stream. A Native NDI Receiver does not learn about the encoding and transport parameters of an NDI Stream until a connection is established.

The NDI SDK, by default, automatically selects and negotiates encoding parameters between Native NDI Devices. Media content enters the Native NDI Sender as raw, uncompressed media and raw, uncompressed media emerges from Native NDI Receivers.

The NDI Advanced SDK supports compressed NDI Streams utilizing H.264, H.265, AAC and Opus codecs. Media content enters the Native NDI Sender as compressed media and compressed media emerges from Native NDI Receivers.

### NDI Metadata

Metadata connections can be implicitly established by the NDI SDK when video connections are established. In some cases, bi-directional metadata connections can be established by the NDI SDK between the Native NDI Sender and Native NDI Receiver. In such cases, NDI Metadata MAY NOT be represented explicitly in NMOS.

## NMOS-NDI Model

Native NDI Devices, Native NDI Receivers and Native NDI Senders are represented by NMOS Devices/Nodes, Receivers and Senders respectively.

A controller which supports NDI connection management via IS-05 MUST support connection of NDI Receivers to NDI Senders. This controller MAY also support connection of NDI Receivers to Native NDI senders, however the discovery of such senders is outside the scope of this document.

### Non-NMOS Connections to NDI Devices

NDI Receivers MUST NOT preclude connections established with Native NDI Senders via the NDI SDK. If an NDI Stream is connected to an NDI Receiver outside of IS-05, the transport parameters of the Connection API of the Receiver MUST be updated to reflect the running parameters which have been set via the alternate protocol. The Receiver MUST update its IS-04 resource `subscription.active` property accordingly, set `subscription.sender_id` to `null` and increment it's version number. If the resource has been registered with an NMOS registry the entry MUST be updated to match the Node API.

### Multiplexed Flow Model

Receivers of NDI Streams MUST have the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and Senders of NDI Streams MUST be associated with a Flow having the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`, as NDI connections could contain multiple essences including video, audio and metadata.

A Flow of `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` format MUST have parents video or audio sub-Flows. The current NDI SDK limits to a maximum of one of each video, audio and metadata sub-Flow, but this specification supports future SDK versions which MAY support multiple audio, video or metadata sub-Flows.

![MUX Sender Model](images/NMOS-NDI-Mux-sender-drawio.svg)

## NDI IS-04 Resources

### Flows

#### MUX Flow

An NDI Sender MUST be associated with a mux Flow having the `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and the `media_type` attribute set to `application/ndi`.

The mux Flow MUST have parent video and/or audio sub-Flows identifying the sub-Flows multiplexed in the NDI Stream. The mux Flow MUST be associated with a Source of format `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`.

#### Video sub-Flows

For NDI High Bandwidth the video sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `video/raw`.

For NDI HX, HX2 and HX3 the video sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `video/H264` or `video/H265`.

NDI Senders SHOULD map the employed `NDIlib_FourCC_video_type` to the NMOS `bit-depth`, `component` and `sub-sampling` properties.

NDI video+alpha video flows MUST be modeled as a single video sub-Flow, including a channel labelled `A` in the `components` parameters for the alpha channel.

#### Audio sub-Flows

For NDI High Bandwidth the audio sub-Flows `media_type` SHOULD be a supported PCM type such as `audio/L16`, `audio/L20`, or `audio/L24`.

For NDI HX, HX2 and HX3 the audio sub-Flows `media_type` attribute MUST be `audio/mpeg4-generic` or `audio/opus`.

### Sources

The Source associated with a mux Flow MUST have its `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux` and its `parents` attribute MUST enumerate the Sources associated with the sub-Flows.

### Senders

NDI Senders do not utilize SDP to describe the NDI Stream; therefore NDI Senders MUST have their `manifest_href` attribute set to `null`.

NDI Senders MUST have their `transport` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi`.

NDI Senders MUST be associated with a mux Flow.

#### NDI Group Tags

NDI Senders MUST specify the NDI groups, through use of tags. NDI group tag MUST use the URN `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi:group`. The NDI group tag can have multiple values to represent multiple NDI groups, for example:
```json
"tags": {
   "urn:x-nmos:tag:transport:ndi:group": [
      "Cameras",
      "Studio-A"
   ]
}
```

### Receivers

The NDI Receiver MUST have its `format` attribute set to `urn:x-nmos:format:mux`.

#### Receiver Capabilities

An NDI Receiver MUST specify as a minimum the following capabilities:

```json
"caps" : {
    "media_types" : [
       "application/ndi"
    ]
}
```

Additional capabilities MAY be expressed in the `constraint_sets` array attribute of the Receiver for the stream of media type `application/ndi` and for the associated sub-streams.

## NDI IS-05 Resources

### Transport Type

The IS-05 transport for NDI is `urn:x-nmos:transport:ndi`.

### Sender transport_file

Not used.

### Sender Transport Parameters

The IS-05 schemas `sender_transport_params_ndi.json` and `constraints_schema_sender_ndi.json` describe the transport parameters associated with the NDI transport.

```json
[
  {
    "machine_name": "ndi-machine-name",
    "source_name": "ndi-sender-unique-name",
    "source_url" : "...",
    "source_address" : "10.10.10.123:5906"
  }
]
```
NDI Senders MUST specify `machine_name` and `source_name` in the Sender `transport_params`. Senders MAY also specify `source_url` and `source_address`.

#### machine_name
The name of the sender node in the NDI domain. A node MUST report the machine name being utilized by the NDI SDK. A controller SHOULD NOT specify a new `machine_name` but SHOULD use `auto` or the current `machine_name`. 

#### source_name
The name of the NDI stream created by the Native NDI Sender in the NDI domain. A node MUST report the sender name being utilized bythe NDI SDK. This parameter MUST NOT be concatenated with `machine_name` in the format `machine_name(source_name)`.

> Informative note: In the NDI domain, the `source_name` and `machine_name` are concatenated in the format `machine_name(source_name)` when streams are discovered and connected, however in the `transport_params`, these properties are kept independent.

#### source_url 
The URL of the Native NDI Sender as utilized by the NDI SDK. The contents are proprietary to the NDI SDK and SHOULD NOT be interpreted. A controller SHOULD specify `auto` or the current value when setting this property. 

#### source_address
The IP address and port that the sender is utilizing for the stream. If specified, it MUST be in the format `ip_address:port_number`, otherwise it MUST be set to `null`.

### Receiver Parameters

The IS-05 schemas `receiver_transport_params_ndi.json` and `constraints_schema_receiver_ndi.json` describe the transport parameters associated with the NDI transport.

```json
[
  {
    "machine_name": "ndi-machine-name",
    "source_name": "ndi-sender-unique-name",
    "source_url" : "...",
    "source_address" : "10.10.10.123:5906"
  }
]
```

When making a connection, `machine_name` and `source_name` MUST be specified in Receiver `transport_params`; `source_url` and `source_address` MAY also be specified in Receiver `transport_params`.

#### machine_name
This indicates the device name of the Native NDI Sender that is to be connected, as utilized by the NDI SDK.

#### source_name
The name of the Native NDI Sender stream in the NDI domain that is to be connected. This property MUST NOT be concatenatedwith `machine_name` in the format `machine_name(source_name)`.

> Informative notes: In the NDI domain, the `source_name` and `machine_name` are concatenated in the format `machine_name(source_name)` when streams are discovered and connected, however in the `transport_params`, these properties are kept independent. 

#### source_url 
The URL of the NDI Native Sender as utilized by the NDI SDK. The contents are proprietary to the NDI SDK and SHOULD NOT be interpreted. This parameter MUST be set to `null` if it is not known.

#### source_address
The IP address and port that the sender is utilizing for the stream. If specified, it MUST be in the format `ip_address:port_number`, otherwise it MUST be set to `null` if not known.

## IS-05 Connection Bahavior 
 Connections in the NDI domain can be specified in several different ways. In each case the Native NDI Receiver identifies the stream to be connected through at least one of:
 - `machine_name` and `source_name`
 - `source_url`
 - `source_address` and `source_name`
 - `source_address`

In order to activate a connection, `machine_name` and `source_name` MUST be specified by a controller in the Receiver `transport_params`. In order to make connections across subnets, `source_url` or `source_address` MUST also be specified.

 Native NDI Devices will not necessarily support all these methods, so Controllers and Devices SHOULD specify as much information as is known in `transport_params`. If the NDI Receiver is not provided with one or more of the above parameters, but is able to determine the additional parameters, it MAY report these updated `transport_params` upon activation.

## Controllers

A controller MUST be able to discover NDI Senders and NDI Receivers by using the query API.

A controller MUST be able to connect an NDI Receiver to an NDI Sender by using the IS-05 API. See example [Use Case 1](#use-case-1-ndi-sender-to-ndi-receiver---is-05-connection).

A controller MAY be able to discover Native NDI Senders.

A controller MAY be able to connect an NDI Receiver to a Native NDI Sender by using the IS-05 API. See example [Use Case 2](#use-case-2-native-ndi-sender-to-ndi-receiver---is-05-connection).

## Use Case Scenarios (Informative)

Use cases are informative only and provided as examples.

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-Ecosystem-drawio.svg)

### Use Case 1: NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - IS-05 Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase1-drawio.svg)

- Controller is informed of sender (device C) through IS-04.
- Controller is informed of receiver (device D) through IS-04.
- Controller initiates connection to receiver (device D) from sender (device C) via IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device D) reports its connections status and transport parameters as outlined in IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 2: Native NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - IS-05 Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase2-drawio.svg)

- Controller is informed of sender (device W) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Controller is informed of receiver (device A) through IS-04.
- Controller initiates connection to receiver (device A) from sender (device W) via IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device A) reports its connections status and transport parameters as outlined in IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 3: Native NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase3-drawio.svg)

- NDI Receiver (device B) is informed of Native NDI Sender (device X) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- NDI Receiver (device B) initiates connection to Native NDI Sender (device X) directly via NDI SDK.
- NDI Receiver updates its IS-04 `active` state, sets the `sender_id` to `null`, increments the version number.
- The controller does not initiate the connection, but can monitor the connection status via IS-04 and IS-05.

### Use Case 4: NDI Sender to Native NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase4-drawio.svg)

- In this scenario, it is assumed the NDI Sender is active.
- Native NDI Receiver (device X) is informed of NDI Sender (device B) by its own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Native NDI Receiver (device X) initiates connection to NDI Sender (device B) directly via NDI SDK.
- The controller does not initiate the connection and cannot monitor the state of the connection.

### Use Case 5: Native NDI Sender to Native NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase5-drawio.svg)

- This scenario exists outside the realm of NMOS. The controller might not be aware of these devices, and does not initiate any connection between them.
- Native NDI Receiver (device Z) and Native NDI Sender (device Y) discover through their own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Connection from Native NDI Sender (device Y) to Native NDI Receiver (device Z) is performed by the NDI SDK.

### Use Case 6: NDI Sender to NDI Receiver - Non-NMOS Connection

![NMOS-NDI Model](images/NMOS-NDI-UseCase6-drawio.svg)

- In this scenario, it is assumed the NDI Sender is active.
- In this scenario, both sender (device E) and receiver (device F) are NMOS devices, but connection is established outside of IS-05.
- NDI Receiver (device E) and NDI Sender (device F) discover through their own means; this could be via NDI discovery.
- Connection from NDI Sender (device E) to NDI Receiver (device F) is performed by the NDI SDK.
- NDI Receiver updates its IS-04 `active` state, sets the `sender_id` to `null`, increments the version number.
- The controller does not initiate the connection, but can monitor the connection status via IS-04 and IS-05.
